      ÖZYEĞİN UNIVERSITY
    FACULTY OF ENGINEERING
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE


                CS 402

             2022 Spring

     SENIOR PROJECT REPORT


 Analyzing Transaction Graphs for
    Price Prediction of Bitcoin



                    By
 Peker Çelik & Eray Erdoğan & Umut Çırak


               Supervised By
              Dr. Emre Sefer
Declaration of Own Work Statement/ (Plagiarism Statement)
Hereby I confirm that all this work is original and my own. I have clearly referenced/listed all sources as appropriate and given
the sources of all pictures, data etc. that are not my own. I have not made any use of the essay(s) or other work of any other
student(s) either past or present, at this or any other educational institution. I also declare that this project has not previously been
submitted for assessment in any other course, degree or qualification at this or any other educational institution.

Student Name and Surname:           Peker Çelik, Eray Erdoğan, Umut Çırak



Signature:



Place, Date:                        06.01.2022




                                                                                                                                       1
Abstract
 The crypto market is more volatile than stock markets and is rapidly affected by the news flow and politics.
There are many complex indicators and methods used for technical analysis. However, with the gradual
development of learning models and data science, large investors and corporate companies are securing
their investments through more comprehensive and highly accurate indices developed [1].

  Prediction tasks on financial time series are notoriously difficult, primarily driven by the high degree of
noise and the generally accepted, semi-strong form of market efficiency [2]. In this paper, several prediction
models integrating machine learning and statistical analysis tools are presented to predict the trend of
bitcoin market and also price.

   The main focused subject in this study is to obtain meaningful outputs from the historical bitcoin
transaction database and increase the accuracy of prediction by using these results. While developing the
model, two transaction datasets, weekly and monthly, were used. Transaction data covers the years 2010 to
2015 as monthly and 03-2011 to 09-2013 as weekly.

 Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are one of the most powerful models for sequential data and Long
Short-Term is one of the most successful RNNs architectures. LSTMs are less commonly applied to
financial time series predictions, yet inherently suitable for this area [3].

   One of the efficient ways to analyze the transaction dataset is the graph format. In this format, many
characteristic features of graphs can be obtained as a single output. In our project, we measured whether the
transaction graphs are effective in price prediction. The contribution of these datasets to the accuracy rate in
many different learning algorithms such as LSTM, KNN, SVM, Random Forest, Decision Tree within the
project was measured and compared.




                                                                                                              2
Contents

I.     INTRODUCTION               4

II.     BACKGROUND                5

III.    PROBLEM STATEMENT         6

IV.     SOLUTION APPROACH         8

V.      RESULTS AND DISCUSSION    26

VI.     RELATED WORK              28

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK   29

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                  29

REFERENCES                        30




                                   3
                                          I.       Introduction
  Bitcoin has become increasingly popular for its simplicity, transparency, and innovations to the financial
system, and this is reflected in its market value. Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency and global payment system
powered by its blockchain network and sees over 400,000 transactions taking place per day.

  Blockchain is a distributed database where all public transactions and transactions are recorded [4]. The
information accumulated in this database is verified by the consensus of the majority of the devices (which
are called mining devices) operating in the blockchain network, and the transaction added to the database
remains there forever.

  In the Bitcoin network, transactions are not confirmed or secured by a third mechanism, cryptographic
proof is used. Each user has one private and one public key in their wallet in the bitcoin network. In a
transaction between two users, the recipient's wallet address, the sender's wallet address, and the BTC
amount are transparently displayed on the network.




                                    Fig. 1: Bitcoin Transaction Structure

  One of the useful artificial neural networks for us to test the effectiveness of graphs in price prediction is
LSTM. The model that makes time-series price forecasting by utilizing historical Price data and transaction
metrics. In our LSTM model, we did not use the results from the transaction graphs in our training split at
first, and we measured our price accuracy. Then we added our graph parameters, observed that our error
rates decreased and the prediction accuracy increased.

   Outside of the graph metrics, relational vector representations make it easy to apply data analysis and
machine learning approaches to the structures[5]. In the machine learning and knowledge representation
literature, a variety of methods for generating such embeddings have been studied.

  Graph embeddings which is basically a way of representing a graph so you can leverage that in a machine
learning model to calculate similarity. Graph embeddings are specific types of embedding that translate
graphs to fixed length tensors, basically encode the entire graph into single vectors. Node2Vec is an
algorithm for mapping nodes in a graph to an embedding space. In general, the embedding space has fewer
dimensions than the original graph's number of nodes.




                                                                                                              4
                                           II.    Background

NetworkX:

  NetworkX is a package for the Python programming language that's used to create, manipulate, and study
the structure, dynamics, and functions of complex graph networks.

Keras:

  Keras is usually used for small datasets. Neural layers, cost functions, optimizers, initialization schemes,
activation functions, and regularization schemes are all standalone modules that you can combine to create
new models. New modules are simple to add, as new classes and functions. Models are defined in Python
code, not separate model configuration files.

Sklearn:

  Scikit-learn (Sklearn) is the most useful and robust library for machine learning in Python. It provides a
selection of efficient tools for machine learning and statistical modeling including classification, regression,
clustering and dimensionality reduction via a consistent interface in Python.

TensorFlow:

  It is an open-source artificial intelligence library, using data flow graphs to build models. It allows
developers to create large-scale neural networks with many layers. TensorFlow is mainly used for:
Classification, Perception, Understanding, Discovering, Prediction and Creation.

Numpy:

  NumPy is the fundamental package for scientific computing in Python. It is a Python library that provides
a multidimensional array object, various derived objects (such as masked arrays and matrices), and an
assortment of routines for fast operations on arrays, including mathematical, logical, shape manipulation,
sorting, selecting, I/O, discrete Fourier transforms basic linear algebra, basic statistical operations, random
simulation and much more.




                                                                                                              5
III. Problem Statement

Project Scope
  In this project, our aim is to build an improved model by performing a comprehensive bitcoin on-chain
(transaction) analysis together with traditional time-series forecasting methods used in bitcoin price
forecasting in academia.

  Models based on on-chain analysis in published studies have a low success rate and are mostly based on
transaction analysis only. We have built a bridge between bitcoin price data and transaction data and
obtained an improved model.

Engineering Problem
   The crypto market is known for being volatile, dynamic, and nonlinear[6]. Accurate bitcoin price
prediction is extremely challenging because of multiple (macro and micro) factors, such as politics, global
economic conditions, unexpected events, a company’s financial performance, and so on.

  Predicting modeling is one of the most popular mathematical methods in many fields. One of the most
important studies among these areas is stock price estimation.

  Most traditional studies on price prediction to date are based on Regression models, Time series models,
ARIMA, LSTM. Projects that do extensive analysis on transaction information between wallets for Bitcoin
price prediction are very few and have a low success rate. In addition, these studies are mostly based on
transaction analysis only.

  In this project, we aimed to establish a more comprehensive and multi-parameter LSTM model and
supervised learning models such as KNN, SVN, Decision Tree, Random Forest by combining embeddings
of transaction graphs and bridging the developed models used in stock price estimation and models that
perform transaction analysis. We aimed to contribute to the insufficient number of studies in the academy by
conducting a study on the correlation between transaction analysis and bitcoin price data.

Assumptions

   ● We will have free and complete access to the Bitcoin Transaction Data Set.
   ● We will have mostly enough processor power and ram capacity to process transaction graphs.
   ● The metrics we obtain from the transaction graphs will yield meaningful results that will help us
     improve our price prediction model.
   ● Our model will be minimally affected by unexpected news flows, political events, and global
     economic change processes.




                                                                                                          6
Constraints

   ● Even when we split the transaction dataset into graphs on a monthly basis, we will never have
     enough computing power and storage capacity to process it holistically, as it contains billions of
     transactions and millions of nodes in a set.
   ● Since the crypto market is much more volatile than the stock market and is much more affected by
     the news feed, the accuracy of our model remained lower than the target rate.
   ● Since transactions between wallets are in many cases emotionally driven by people's panic and
     complacency conditions in the market, and also because bitcoin transactions are transparent, these
     transactions made by large investors to mislead small investors may compromise the tangibility of
     the analysis we are trying to do and may not yield any meaningful conclusions.
   ● Most of the transactions that take place in the Bitcoin network are done by a method called coinjoin.
     The coinjoin method reduces multiple transactions to one, and we see this transaction in the network
     as multi-wallet to multi-wallet. For this reason, we need to use the coinjoin parser to make the
     transaction singular, and this is a difficult process.




                                                                                                         7
                                      IV. Solution Approach
4.1. Experimental Setup

The experimental environment of this study was prepared in the following three stages,

   The first step is collecting transaction datasets and splitting these sets into weekly and monthly. This stage
is a very important and meticulous stage because the data is very large and combining data into learning
models is a more time-consuming process compared to training. When choosing the date range of the
transaction data set we used, we paid attention to the fact that it was independent of external factors and that
the price volatility was relatively low. That's why we started at the beginning of 2010, a date when bitcoin
started to be recognized and priced after its invention. As we get closer to the present, the increase in bitcoin
transactions has made the dataset very large and we used data up to 2015 because there was not enough cpu
power to process this data.

   As a second step, research was conducted on choosing the right methods to study the efficiency of
transaction data. The architecture has been tuned with the right parameter setting for LSTM and other
supervised machine learning models to work best. Measurement metrics were determined in order to
compare the models.

  The usability of transaction data in predicting the price of cryptocurrencies was evaluated together with the
results obtained as a third step.

4.2. Data Preparation

Data preparation in the scope of this project involves graphing, graph sampling, obtaining graph
embeddings, consolidation and data division for test and training.

1. Graphing
  A graph database stores nodes and relationships instead of tables. It Navigates deep hierarchies and shows
inter-relationships. This process is one of the most important processes in building our model.




                                      Fig 2: Part of Transaction Dataset




                                                                                                               8
  Network graphs show interconnections between a set of entities[7] where entities are nodes and the
connections between them are represented through links or edges. In the graphs we created in Bitcoin
transactions, each node represents the wallet address, and the edge between the two nodes represents the
transactions processed.




                                              Fig 3: Daily Graph


 We turned these transactions into graph networks in two different ways. We first analyzed the transactions
that took place on the network as daily graph networks, and then we converted them into weekly graphs.




                                             Fig 4: Weekly Graph


 When we compared the model daily and weekly graphs, it gave a lower error rate with the weekly data.
That's why we continued to use weekly graphs.




                                   Fig 5: Transaction Graph[Closer Look]1




                                                                                                              9
                                   Fig 6: Transaction Graph[Closer Look]2



2. Graph Sampling
  Graph sampling is an approach to sampling from nodes and edges without destroying the characteristic
features of the original graph with an algorithm. Commonly used techniques are Vertex Sampling, Edge
Sampling, and Traversal Based Sampling. Exploration or traversal (also called topology-based) approaches
are based on the idea of randomly selecting one node and then exploring its neighborhood.

 Traversal (topology-based) approaches are based on the idea of randomly selecting one node and then
exploring its neighborhood [8]. Sampling algorithms based on these techniques are Simple Random Walk
Sampling (SRW), Random Walk Sampling with Fly Back Probability (RWF), Induced Subgraph Random
Walk Sampling (ISRW), Snowball Sampling (SB), forest fire Sampling (FF), and more.


 Another method, which is edge sampling, focuses on the selection of edges rather than nodes to populate
the sample. Thus, the node selection step in the edge sampling algorithm proceeds by just sampling edges,
and including both nodes when a particular edge is sampled.


  Instead of using these algorithms as the graph sampling method in our project, we took a random sample
containing 50000 nodes from each graph. The reason we prefer this method is that transaction graphs are too
large to sample and we do not provide enough processing power and RAM capacity to use these methods.


3. Obtaining Graph Embeddings
 In the machine learning literature, a variety of strategies for producing embeddings have been investigated.
Embedding is a method of converting a complex dataset into a simple fixed-length vector (tensor) that
captures important information while lowering dimensionality. Distances between embedded vectors can
capture important notions in the original input by capturing similarity between various data points.




                                                                                                            10
  The translation of a graph into a vector or a group of vectors is known as graph embedding. The graph
topology, vertex-to-vertex connection, and other essential information about graphs, subgraphs, and vertices
should be captured during embedding.

  Graph embeddings are frequently utilized as input features in machine learning studies including link
prediction, community recognition, classification, and other similar tasks. For this reason, it was a method
that we included in our study, we used the embeddings of our weekly and monthly graph data in machine
learning models. Graph embeddings can be generated through various algorithms, in this project the
Node2Vec algorithm is preferred.

  Node2Vec is a method for mapping nodes in a graph to an embedding space. The algorithm aims to keep
the original graph's structure; comparable nodes in the network will produce similar embeds in the embed
region. Each node in the network is represented by a vector in these embedding spaces.

  Node2vec has random walks in its working mechanism. If every step is calculated probabilistically, this
means that every time the index is shifted in a certain direction depending on a probabilistic outcome[9].
This method explores the link between each step made and its distance from the beginning position. The
following formula is introduced by Node2Vec for estimating the chance of migrating to node x if you were
previously at node v:




                                 Fig 7: Probability of moving (retrieved from [10])


The unnormalized transition probability between nodes x and v [10] is vx, and Z is the normalization
constant. For unweighted graphs, the Node2vec approach would be a better alternative since if each edge
had a weight, it would be easier to generate a bias that could affect random walks.

The Node2Vec algorithm implies a directed random walk with two parameters, p and q. The likelihood of a
random walk returning to the previous node is p, while the probability of a random walk passing through
previously unknown parts of the graph is q.




                                    Fig 8: Random Walk, (retrieved from [10])
                                  Where dtx is the shortest path between nodes t and x.




                                                                                                          11
The SkipGram model has an important place in the node2vec algorithm. The skip-gram model is a basic
neural network with one hidden layer that predicts the likelihood of a given word being present when an
input word is present. [11] The target word's pairings with all other words make up the training data.




                                Fig 9: Node2Vec Architecture (Image taken from [11])


Node2vec starts by taking a graph as input and extracting a collection of random walks from it. The walks
are then represented as a word sequence, with each node representing a word. After that, the produced
random walks are fed into the skip-gram model then skip-gram produces an embedding for each node.

4. Consolidation
  Consolidation is the process of combining all features used and graph features as a single data frame. In
this stage, the historical bitcoin transaction data is collected from https://padlab.ir/data/bitcoin-mtg.tar.gz,
https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/bitcoin-transactions-data-2011-2013#files as monthly and historical
bitcoin price data is collected from https://www.investing.com/crypto/bitcoin/historical-data. Weekly
transaction data collected from Google Cloud's BigQuery service. We combined the graph metrics we
obtained from the graphs we created from the transaction dataset with another dataset containing the price,
volume, change(%) data for the LSTM model.




                                      Fig 10: Consolidated data frame with graph metrics




                                                                                                             12
                                 Fig 11: Consolidated data frame with vector embeddings



Graph vectors were combined with other features for use in supervised machine learning models.

5. Train and Test Split
   Train test split of the dataset is slicing the data set according to some ratio with or without randomly
having two split datasets with the purpose of the train, validate and test the model. It is important because
depending on the characteristics of the dataset and the topic, one method may have a significant advantage
over the others.

 We split the dataset into two different techniques. First, we split randomly with the ratios of 80% training
and 20% test. Secondly, we split the dataset with a sliding window perspective. At that point, we tried
different variants and one of the best solutions is training for 2 months and testing for 1 day so that we
divide it in that order.


4.3. LSTM Model

 Long Short Term Memory networks are a special kind of RNN, effective at capturing long-term temporal
dependencies.

 LSTMs on the other hand are both general and effective at capturing long-term temporal dependencies [5].
They minimize the optimization problems that affect the operation of simple recurrent networks (SRNs).
Gates in the LSTM structure determine what will be remembered and what will be forgotten. That is, if the
incoming input is unimportant, it is forgotten, if it is important, it is transferred to the next stage. It does this
with the help of Gate and Cell State.




                                                                                                                   13
                                             Fig 12: Long Short Term Memory
                      Retrieved from: https://towardsdatascience.com/lstm-networks-a-detailed-explanation




1. Graph Metrics
 Metrics characterize the structure of the graph, the graph connection, and its components, the distance
between nodes, various definitions of centrality, etc. we can reach knowledge that the node depends on its
neighbor [9].

 The NetworkX library supports graphs like these, where each edge can have weight. We use some of the
metrics to determine and analyze the graph features, for that reason we use the NetworkX library. These
metrics are respectively, Density, Assortativity Coefficient, Average Clustering Coefficient.



1.1 Density
  Simply we can define graph density. The density of a graph is a measure of ties comparing how many ties
among nodes there have been and how many ties between nodes are possible.

The density of the undirected and directed graph is quite simply calculated as in figure 4




1.2 Assortativity Coefficient
  Assortativity measures the tendency of a peak during a network being connected by other peaks and
vertex-specific features. Normally, assortativity coefficients are described for unweighted and undirected
networks [10]. Simply we can define the assortativity coefficient as measuring the correlation between
every pair of nodes that are connected with one another [11].




                                                                                                             14
1.3 Average Clustering Coefficient
   Many networks show a tendency between neighbors deviating from uncorrelated random networks in
which triangles are rare. We can call this tendency clustering and this shows us the clustering of edges into
firmly connected neighborhoods [12].




2. LSTM Model Architecture
  Model architecture is important to complete the task. Choosing architecture accordingly increases the
success rate. The main reason for choosing stacking LSTM is to allow for greater model complexity. Since
our object has much more complexity, we get much more accuracy in our forecasting model with
Stacked-LSTM.
  Our LSTM model is a four stacked model. The architecture is complex enough to obtain accurate
conclusions. In our experimental setup, we have multiple models with the same layers but with different
numbers of parameters.




                                  Fig 13: LSTM Configuration of classic splitting


  The models that use sliding window data also have the same layer architecture. However, it has more
parameters.




                                                                                                          15
                              Fig 14: LSTM Configuration of sliding window splitting




4. Analysis of LSTM Model

 In the LSTM model we built, commonly used error metrics to measure the accuracy of the price prediction
were used. These are RMSE, MAE, and MAPE.


RMSE: For analyzing the accuracy of the model we use the Root Mean Square Error(RMSE).
The difference or the difference between the real and the predicted price value is normalized by using the
RMSE value. RMSE is the square root of the mean average of the square of all of the errors. RMSE
produces larger error results compared to Mean Absolute Error.




MAE: The mean absolute error is a measure of the difference between two continuous variables. MAE is
also the average horizontal distance between each data point and the best-fit line. Since the MAE value is
easily interpretable, it is frequently used in regression and time series problems. The MAE is a linear score
that measures the mean size of errors in a set of predictions without considering their direction, with all
individual errors weighted equally on the mean. The MAE value can range from 0 to ∞. Negatively oriented
scores, that is, predictors with lower values, perform better.




                                                                                                          16
MAPE: In regression and time series models, the mean absolute percent error is frequently used to measure
the accuracy of predictions. If there are zeros among the actual values, MAPE cannot be calculated because
  they will be divided by zero. The percentage error cannot exceed 100% for very low forecast values, but
 there is no upper limit to the percent error for very high forecast values. When MAPE is used to compare
 the accuracy of estimators, it is biased in that it systematically chooses a method with very low estimates.




 Our error rate tables are given below. We have seen that the sliding window increases the error rates of the
model with graph metrics. On the other hand non-random division of




                                         Fig 15: Error Rates Comparison


 The error rates we have shared above are split classically. Hence the sliding window has higher error rates,
we do not continue on that aspect.
 Consolidated data frame is checked for correlation and the visualization is done. As you can see below the
correlation matrix is helpful for us to see the relationship between market values and transactions.




                                                                                                           17
                                               Fig 16: Correlation




5. Effectiveness of Embeddings

 The main purpose of our project is to conduct a study on the usability of the transaction dataset to improve
efficiency in the models used in price prediction. In the first stage, we showed that using graph metrics in
our LSTM model increases the accuracy.

 Embeddings can also be used as a method to benefit from transaction graphs. As already mentioned before,
graph embedding is a fixed length vector representation that carries information about nodes, edges and
their features. By this means, graphs are transformed into a format that can be computed easily and
integrated into the models.

  In the next phase of our study, we used some supervised machine learning algorithms such as Support
Vector Machine(SVM), K-Nearest Neighbors(KNN), Random Forest(RF), Decision Tree(DT) to understand
the effectiveness of embeddings by bitcoin trend forecasting. A training set is used in supervised learning to
train models to produce the desired output. This training dataset contains features and correct outputs, so the
algorithm learns over time. The features used in our models are price and volume related features and graph
embeddings.




                                                                                                             18
 In this study we use seven features to predict a bitcoin trend – close price, open price, high price, volume,
percentage of change and graph embeddings. Through these models, we measured the trend prediction
accuracy by first using price related data and then adding transaction data(graph embeddings). Transaction
data slightly increased the accuracy and monthly data produced a better result.

5.1 Hyperparameter Optimization
 When building a machine learning model, there are design options for how to build the model architecture.
To discover the optimal state of a model, we need to try a range of possibilities.

 Hyper parameters are parameters that can be adjusted and fine-tuned in order to improve the performance
of the machine learning model and the process of searching for the ideal model architecture is called
hyperparameter tuning. These are not model parameters, hence they can not be learned directly from data.
Train-test split ratio, learning rate, batch size, choice of activation function can be given as examples of the
most known hyperparameters.

 We made some parameter adjustments in each model to get better accuracy than the learning models we
used. We did not handle this process manually because it is a very time-consuming and resource-intensive
process. Instead, there are many functions that automate parameters for machine learning models, and we
used one of them, grid search. The GridSearchCV function that comes in Scikit-learn is used for
hyperparameter tuning of our models.

  Grid Search assesses the performance of each combination of hyperparameters and their values, then
chooses the optimum value for the hyperparameters.




                         Fig 17: Grid Search Visualization on two parameters (Image from [28])


5.2 Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
 Overfit problem in machine learning is more common with high dimensional datasets. This problem
reduces the generalization capacity of the algorithm in the training set. To overcome this problem,
dimensional reduction methods should be applied by reducing the number of features. Principal Component




                                                                                                               19
Analysis (PCA) is one of these methods. While PCA tries to reduce the features in the dataset, it aims to
preserve as much information as possible about the dataset.

 While PCA is advantageous in some aspects, it also has some disadvantages. Finding correlated features
increases power and time consumption, especially in datasets with a large number of features. PCA removes
correlated features. Since it removes unnecessary features from the dataset, the overfit problem is reduced
also. On the other hand, if there is not the right number of features to train, information loss may increase
and this is a disadvantage.

 When comparing the machine learning models we used in our study, we also considered different PCA
values, and in some cases increasing PCA and in some cases decreasing PCA increased accuracy. The table
below shows how the different PCA values we use with the weekly dataset in the KNN algorithm affect the
results. Better results can be achieved as can be seen with a correct PCA adjustment.




                                                 Fig 18: PCA Tuning




5.3 Measurements
 In order to decide which model should be the most accurate in machine learning, many measurements are
needed to evaluate well. Model selection should not be made only on accuracy in project outputs. Three
different metrics were used to compare the five different machine learning models used in this study and
monitor the overall performance of the embeddings on models - F1 Score, Precision, Accuracy.

 One technique to determine how often a machine learning classification system properly classifies a data
point is to look at its accuracy. The number of correct predictions divided by the total number of samples is
used to measure accuracy.It is calculated as the number of true positives and true negatives divided by the
number of true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives. A data point that the algorithm
properly classifies as true or false is referred to as a true positive or true negative. A data point that was
wrongly categorized by the algorithm is referred to as a false positive or false negative.



                                     where TP = True Positives, TN = True Negatives,
                                     FP = False Positives, and FN = False Negatives.




                                                                                                              20
 Precision shows how many of the values predicted by the algorithm as positive are actually positive. The
precision value is especially important when the cost of False Positive estimation is high. Precision,
therefore, calculates the accuracy for the minority class [25].




 The number of positive class predictions made out of all positive examples in the dataset is measured by
recall. Recall is a metric that indicates how well our model can detect relevant data.




  The F1-score, which is defined as the harmonic mean of the model's accuracy and recall, is a technique of
combining the model's precision and recall. It is possible to change the F-score to prioritize precision above
recall, or vice versa. It is primarily used to compare the performance of precision and recall.




6. Experimental Models

       In our experiments we aimed to catch the trends that upwards, downwards and neutral. We used a
threshold to decide is the change is a trend or not. We labeled the movements above the threshold as up or
down and the ones under threshold are labeled as neutral.

6.1 Support Vector Machine (SVM)
  Support vector machines are among the most basic and, perhaps, elegant algorithms for classification and
regression[23]. It works well in high-dimensional spaces and when the number of dimensions exceeds the
number of samples.

 It is built on the concept of structural risk reduction.. SVMs have a superior generalization performance and
are less prone to overfitting, making them ideal for stock market prediction applications [24]. For this
reason, SVM became one of the algorithms we used in our project.

  SVM categorizes data points by mapping them to a high-dimensional feature space, even if the data isn't
linearly separable. After finding a separator between the categories, the data are converted so that the
separator may be drawn as a hyperplane. New data features can be utilized to forecast which category a new
record should belong to.




                                                                                                            21
  The support vector machine algorithm's goal is to identify a hyperplane in an N-dimensional space (N —
the number of features) that distinguishes between data points[29]. There are several hyperplanes from
which to choose to split the two groups of data points. The algorithm tries to find a plane with the maximum
distance between the data points of both classes, so that future data points can be classified with more
confidence.




                           Fig 19: Classification of two classes using SVM (Image from [29])


As the number of features increases, the size of the hyperplane increases. For example, if the number of
features is two, the hyperplane is just a line, if it is three, it is a two-dimensional plane.

  SVM has been used to construct the forecasting model. The approach was tested to solve the prediction
task of directional changes in Bitcoin price. The measurement values obtained as a result of training made
with the SVM model only with price, volume-dependent features and then embedding features are in the
table below.




                                          Fig 20: Increase in results of SVM.


 The data in the table above shows the increase in measurement metrics when graph embeddings are added
as parameters. The results of the SVM algorithm were worse compared to other algorithms, with a better
performance in the monthly interval.

6.2 Decision Tree
  A tree has numerous real-world analogues, and it turns out that it has affected a broad field of machine
learning, including classification and regression [26]. In big datasets, decision trees can be used to find
characteristics and extract patterns that are useful for predictive modeling. The interpretability of the created
model is one benefit of decision tree modeling over other pattern recognition approaches [27].




                                                                                                              22
                                        Fig 21: Decision Tree Classifier


   The decision tree algorithm is useful for representing such mappings. Internal nodes have dataset
properties, branches hold decision rules, and each leaf node has the outcome. The algorithm uses two node
structures, a decision, and a leaf node. Decision nodes are used to make any decision and leaf nodes are the
output of those decisions.

   The method is non-parametric, which means it can handle huge, complex datasets without imposing a
complex parametric framework. Therefore, this model is one the suitable models for this study, since the
bitcoin transaction data is quite large.




                                        Fig 22: Increase in results of DT.

With the Decision Tree, we can see the increase in measurement metrics with embeddings in the trend
forecast model from the table above. It achieved a very slight increase in accuracy weekly but did not make
a difference monthly. Compared to other model results, DT does not perform well.



6.3 KNN

  To begin, calculated parameter K, which is the number of closest neighbors. Determined the distance
between the query instance and each of the training samples. Based on the K-th minimum distance, sort the
distance and find the closest neighbors. Used the simple category of the nearest neighbors when we've
gathered all of the data.

 KNeighborsClassifier implements learning based on the nearest neighbors of each query point, which is
an integer value specified by the user.




                                                                                                          23
The optimal choice of the value is highly data-dependent: in general, a bigger k reduces the impacts of
noise while blurring the classification boundaries.

Important parameters were used in the project:

leaf_size = 1:         Leaf size passed to BallTree or KDTree. This can affect the speed of the construction
                       and query, as well as the memory required to store the tree. The optimal value
                       depends on the nature of the problem.
n_neighbors =16:       Number of neighbors to use by default for k_neighbors queries.
p=1:                   Power parameter for the Minkowski metric.

In the table below, we can see the performance increase data of graph embeddings in the KNN algorithm.
We achieved the best result with the KNN algorithm and made a step forward in the usability of transaction
data in bitcoin trend prediction.




                                        Fig 23: Increase in results of KNN.




6.4 Random Forest

 RandomTreesEmbedding performs an unsupervised data transformation. RandomTreesEmbedding encodes
data by the indices of the leaves a data point ends up in, using a forest of fully random trees. The index is
encoded in a one-of-K fashion, resulting in a sparse binary coding with high dimensionality. This code can
be computed quickly and then utilized as a starting point for future learning exercises. The number of trees
and the maximum depth per tree can be used to affect the code's length and sparseness.

  A random forest is a meta-estimator that employs averaging to increase predicted accuracy and prevent
overfitting by fitting a variety of decision tree classifiers on different subsets of the data.

Important parameters were used in the project:

max_depth:100:                 The maximum depth of the tree.
max_features: 3:               The number of features to consider when looking for the best split.
min_samples_leaf: 3:           The bare minimum of samples must be present at a leaf node. A split point
                               will be evaluated if it leaves at least min samples of leaf training data for
                               each of the left and right branches, regardless of depth.




                                                                                                               24
min_samples_split: 10:               The minimum number of samples required to split an internal node
n_estimators: 200:                   The number of trees in the forest.

In the table below, we can see the performance increase data of graph embeddings in the RF algorithm. We
have achieved an increase in accuracy of nearly 14% with the RF algorithm. Compared to SVM and DT
algorithms, they performed very well. Compared to KNN, it is a very good result even though it has less
performance.




                                                Fig 24: Increase in results of RF.



Knowledge and Skill Set

  While continuing this research, we benefited from the online resources as well as the courses we
took.These courses helped us to design different areas of expertise. The courses stated have the most effect
on our project.


1. CS 201 (Computer Programming)            : This course helped us to analyze graphs.
2. CS 320 ( Software Engineering )          : This course helped us to have an agile process and write the project report in the
right format during our work.
3. CS 333 ( Algorithm Analysis )            : This course helped us to design paradigms, Graph algorithms
4. CS 440 ( Machine Learning in Finance ) : This course helped us to build machine learning models on finance time-series data
and evaluate our models.
5. CS 452 (Introduction to data science)    : This course taught us how to analyze data that we collected from transactions and
the crypto market.




                                                                                                                                   25
Results and Discussion

LSTM Results
  From the result obtained in this research, This study shows the next day's bitcoin price forecasting method
using different methods of time-series analyses such as the LSTM model. We split the Bitcoin data into
training and testing. When we evaluate the results we have evidence of graph metrics are more accurate than
without using graph metrics.




                                           Fig 25: Training predictions.


 In figure 25 above, you can see that peak times of the price out model can be closer to the real values. As it
comes to the test, you can see below in figure 26 that also in test data graph metrics help the model to
predict the price.




                                             Fig 26: Test Predictions




                                                                                                             26
Effectiveness of Graph Embeddings
   A series of experiments have been conducted to examine the effectiveness of graph embeddings on
proposed models. The embedding data we obtained from the transaction dataset increased the accuracy of
the models we used within the scope of the project, as can be seen in the table below.




                                                 Weekly Results




                                                 Monthly Results


SVM and DT generally did not provide a noticeable performance increase in the accuracy of the models. We
achieved a 22% increase in accuracy with KNN and an approximately 14% increase in accuracy with RF.
Models perform better on a monthly basis. There may be two reasons for this. Firstly, while monthly data
covers transaction data between 2010-2015, weekly data covers between 03-2011 and 09-2013. The second
reason is that the data were taken from two different sources. Weekly data is collected through the BigQuery
service provided by Google Cloud. In the transaction data obtained from here, CoinJoin data, which is the
transaction aggregator method commonly used in the bitcoin network, is ignored. For this reason, the loss of
information in the weekly transaction network may have prevented an effective result.

Discussion
 The decentralized and transparent structure of Bitcoin, which is different from traditional currencies, and
the fact that each transaction on the network is open to the public, provides an advantage in addition to the
models that make a lot of work on fiat currency and stock predictions.

 The list of weekly and monthly transactions was downloaded and compiled from the sources mentioned in
the article, and the structure and development of the transaction network were investigated. We have
performed detailed analysis of usability of Bitcoin transactions in machine learning projects.

 Because the graphs’ sizes were too large to process, they were sampled so that they could be applied to the
models. Graph samples led to an increase in results even though fairly small portions of the actual data were




                                                                                                                27
used. This brings an idea that better results can be obtained by using a more accurate sampling model or
using all transaction data with sufficient CPU power.

  On the other hand, the models used in our project are the models used in many stock market forecasting
studies before. In this paper, we have shown that these models, which are widely used in the literature, can
also be used in the crypto market.

                                          V.    Related Work

A. Specifically LSTM Approaches
 Salim Lahiri et al.[13] used Deep Neural Network to predict the bitcoin’s, ripple’s, and Digital Cash’s price
prediction, They presented a comparative analysis of the predictability of deep learning neural networks
(Long-short term memory) versus generalized regression neural networks (GRNN).When these results were
observed, Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) neural networks results were found to be more consistent than
Generalized Regression Neural Networks (GRNN) results. Trying and testing the value and consistency of
Long-short term memory (LSTM) has also been studied in other articles working on this. Another example
of work in this area is the implementation of a Bayesian optimized recurrent neural network (RNN) and a
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) network. In the case, specified study Bitcoin prediction with
implementing the LSTM is more capable of recognizing longer-term dependencies [14].

B. Time Series Forecasting
  These days, machine learning (ML) and neural network algorithms have gained much appreciation for
implementing time series for Bitcoin price prediction. According to Roy’s paper [15], They worked on time
series data set and then forecast the future Bitcoin closing price using the previous data. They use
Autocorrelation for applying time series. Autocorrelation is the correlation of a signal between its values at
different times. In other words, it is the expression of similarity between observed values in a given time
series. Autocorrelation helps to determine the optimal solution for a particular dataset and the forecasting
method fits more precisely. Also, there is a research paper that worked on time series analysis for analyzing
the history of Bitcoin transactions [16]. The purpose of the project is to detect changing points, namely
anomaly detection, against a given (Bitcoin) address's transaction history.

C. Bitcoin Transaction
  According to some related work on the bitcoin transaction, researchers use transaction graphs. They
discovered that the network includes many small transactions, but also a subset of transactions that move
large amounts of money. The analysis then focuses on large transactions to identify how quantities are piling
up and spreading out [17].




                                                                                                               28
                               VI. Conclusion and Future Work

A.Conclusion
 In this study on Bitcoin transaction analysis, we showed the results that emerged with the data we collected,
the tools we used and the machine learning models we build. As a result, transaction data can be used
effectively to determine the direction in the crypto market. Transaction data, which we can access through
the transparent structure of the crypto currencies, provides an advantage compared to the studies used for
stock market forecasting.



B.Future Work
  While working with the Transaction dataset, our biggest problem was the lack of processing power and
capacity when converting to graph format and outputting it. To solve this problem, we will divide our
dataset into parts under certain categories. To take advantage of edge features, we will create directed graphs
and work on node embeddings by building a GNN model. Bitcoin and especially the crypto market gained
great popularity after 2018, so volatility has increased and it has become more affected by external reasons.
Since our study covers data between 2010 and 2015, we did not test the current effectiveness of this study.
In the next phase of the project, we will test the current effectiveness of current models.



                                            Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. Emre Sefer, Ozyegin University for helping us during this research.




                                                                                                            29
                                                   References
[1]Roondiwala, Murtaza, Harshal Patel, and Shraddha Varma. "Predicting stock prices using LSTM." International
Journal of Science and Research (IJSR) 6.4 (2017): 1754-1756.

[2] Fama, E. F. (1970). Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. The Journal of Finance, 25 (2),
383–417. doi: 10.2307/2325486 .

[3] Fischer, Thomas, and Christopher Krauss. "Deep learning with long short-term memory networks for financial
market predictions." European Journal of Operational Research 270.2 (2018): 654-669.

[4] Crosby, Michael, et al. "Blockchain technology: Beyond bitcoin." Applied Innovation 2.6-10 (2016): 71.

[5] Grohe, Martin. "word2vec, node2vec, graph2vec, x2vec: Towards a theory of vector embeddings of structured
data." Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on Principles of Database Systems.
2020.

[6] Greff, K., Srivastava, R. K., Koutník, J., Steunebrink, B. R., & Schmidhuber, J. (2016). LSTM: A search space
odyssey. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 28(10), 2222-2232.

[7] Yousaf, Imran, Shoaib Ali, and Wing-Keung Wong. "An empirical analysis of the volatility spillover effect between
world-leading and the asian stock markets: Implications for Portfolio management." Journal of Risk and Financial
Management 13.10 (2020): 226.
[8] Data-To-Viz. (May 15, 2020). Network Diagram https://www.data-to-viz.com/graph/network.html
[9] Grover, A., & Leskovec, J. (2016). Node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 13-17-August-2016, 855–864.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939754
[10] K. Toyoda, T. Ohtsuki and P. T. Mathiopoulos, "Time Series Analysis for Bitcoin Transactions: The Case of
Pirate@40's HYIP Scheme," 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), 2018, pp.
151-155, doi: 10.1109/ICDMW.2018.00028.
[11] Grover, A., & Leskovec, J. (2016). Node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 13-17-August-2016, 855–864.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939754
[12] Hu, Pili, and Wing Cheong Lau. "A survey and taxonomy of graph sampling." arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.5865
(2013).
[13] Nicosia, V., Tang, J., Mascolo, C., Musolesi, M., Russo, G., & Latora, V. (2013). Graph Metrics for Temporal
Networks. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-36461-7_2
[14] Yuan, Y., Yan, J., & Zhang, P. (2021). Assortativity measures for weighted and directed networks.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.05389
[15] Learn About Assortativity Coefficient in Python With Data From UK Faculty Dataset (2008) Student Guide.
(2019).
[16] Saramäki, J., Kivelä, M., Onnela, J.-P., Kaski, K., & Kertész, J. (2006). Generalizations of the clustering
coefficient to weighted complex networks. http://www.arxiv.org
[17] S. Lahmiri and S. Bekiros, "Cryptocurrency forecasting with deep learning chaotic neural networks", Chaos
Solitons & Fractals, vol. 118, pp. 35-40, 2019.
[18] McNally, S., Roche, J., & Caton, S. (2018). Predicting the Price of Bitcoin Using Machine Learning. Proceedings
- 26th Euromicro International Conference on Parallel, Distributed, and Network-Based Processing, PDP 2018,
339–343. https://doi.org/10.1109/PDP2018.2018.00060




                                                                                                                      30
[19] S. Roy, S. Nanjiba and A. Chakrabarty, "Bitcoin Price Forecasting Using Time Series Analysis," 2018 21st
International Conference of Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT), 2018, pp. 1-5, doi:
10.1109/ICCITECHN.2018.8631923.
[20] D. Di Francesco Maesa, A. Marino and L. Ricci, "Uncovering the Bitcoin Blockchain: An Analysis of the Full
Users Graph," 2016 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), 2016, pp.
537-546, doi: 10.1109/DSAA.2016.52.
[21] Grover, A., & Leskovec, J. (2016). Node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 13-17-August-2016, 855–864.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939754
[22] https://arxiv.org/pdf/1607.00653.pdf
[23] https://towardsdatascience.com/node2vec-explained-db86a319e9ab
[24] Bratanic, Tomaz. “Complete Guide to Understanding NODE2VEC Algorithm.” Medium, Towards Data Science,
4 Sept. 2021, https://towardsdatascience.com/complete-guide-to-understanding-node2vec-algorit hm-4e9a35e5d147.
[25] Y. Lin, H. Guo and J. Hu, "An SVM-based approach for stock market trend prediction," The 2013 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2013, pp. 1-7, doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2013.6706743.
[26] Gujarati, D. N. (2003). Basic Econometrics. 4th. New York: McGrawHill.
[27] Davis, Jesse, and Mark Goadrich. "The relationship between Precision-Recall and ROC curves." Proceedings of
the 23rd international conference on Machine learning. 2006.
[28] Myles, Anthony J., et al. "An introduction to decision tree modeling." Journal of Chemometrics: A Journal of the
Chemometrics Society 18.6 (2004): 275-285.
[29] Quinlan, J. Ross. "Learning decision tree classifiers." ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 28.1 (1996): 71-72.
[30] https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/06/tune-hyperparameters-with-gridsearchcv/
[31] Noble, William S. "What is a support vector machine?." Nature biotechnology 24.12 (2006): 1565-1567.




                                                                                                                  31
